# Maverik Case Competition

This project was completed as a part of the Masters of Science in Business Analytics program at the University of Utah in the final Capstone course. Maverik was the sponsor of the case competition in which we were tasked with providing accurate forecasts for a new store's first year of sales in four major product categories.

## Business Problem and Project Objective

Maverik is a leading convenience and fuel store company known for providing excellent customer experience and a specialized food selection for every "Adventure's First Stop". Maverik, founded in 1928, has grown to 8000 employees and 400 locations and is expanding with their recent acquisition of the gas station company "Kum & Go". Opening 30 stores each year, Maverik faces the unique challenge of forecasting and evaluating the performance expectations for each new location over its first year. Complex sales predictors, varying seasonality influences, and market fluctuations complicate the modeling process and impact the accuracy of sales projections, leading to the deliverable being a model that produces a daily level forecast that considers seasonality. The benefit of the solution is that an accurate forecasting model will enable Maverik to improve financial planning and create more accurate initial ROI documentation.

The objective of the project was to create a time series model that can accurately forecast multiple sales categories for a new store over its first year of being open. Using store-level data provided by Maverik and features engineered to represent seasonality trends, models were built to forecast four different product categories; merchandise, food, gasoline, and diesel. Our groups solution to this business problem was to create a Lasso model with lagged sales terms included, a vector autoregression (VAR) model, and an autoregressive integrated moving averages (ARIMA) model that allowed for multivariate analysis, with all models having the ability to forecast both individual and aggregate time intervals.

## Individual Contributions

Throughout the EDA process, my contributions were performing the initial feature engineering by creating the column to track days since the store opened, the indicators for whether a given holiday was major or general, and the visualizations relating to sales trends over time. In the modeling phase, I worked on creating a lasso model with lagged terms from day 1 to 365 and implementing the ARIMA modeling approach, which included creating a workflow that started with a univariate version of an ARIMA model that was built upon to include external regressors while optimizing the ideal combination of parameters. Lastly, I created many of the data visualizations that accompanied our results and formatted them for the final presentation.

## Business Value Added

The final models were the VAR and ARIMA models that were benchmarked against the current model that Maverik uses, with each model outperforming at least one of the benchmarks. The ARIMA model performed well in forecasting diesel trends where it was able to determine seasonality trends that were more clear than some of the other product categories. As for the VAR, it provides a computationally effective model that is built only on the four product categories, which tend to follow similar trends over the course of the year, meaning it can be applied to any new store that has data on these product categories regardless of its associated qualitative variables. While it is a model that is currently trained on only one year of data, it could easily be expanded to forecast a longer time horizon which is the situation that it is most effective in forecasting.

Overall both the ARIMA and VAR models give Maverik the ability to predict cumulative sales for the year from varying time points in the year, for example from day 14 of store being open or day 200 of the store being open. Each model has its own respective strengths and weaknesses, with a major distinction being in the ARIMA's ability to predict daily level sales more accurately than the VAR with the VAR being better at predicting longer time horizons. The ARIMA workflow is set up in a way that is very personalized to a single store, meaning it is able to optimize the parameters to fit the seasonality trends in that specific store but, for this process to be the most effective, it needs data from a longer time horizon to learn the trends. This means that the forecast improves with time and better matches daily level sales but may not be as useful for predicting total annual sales in the first year as the VAR. The strength of the VAR model is that it is very applicable to all sales categories and provides a versatile way to forecast revenues, especially over longer time horizons. We also believe that this model could be vastly improved with a larger training set, which we did not have access to in this project but Maverik could utilize to improve the accuracy of its forecasts for a store's first year of sales. All in all, both models provide Maverik with tools to forecast the sales for the four significant product categories over a store's first year of being open with different strengths and use cases for each model.

## Difficulties and Challenges

One of the main challenges that we faced in this project was that the dataset we were building our model on only contained one year of data on each of the 37 stores. Due to this limitation of the dataset, creating a singular ARIMA model on all the available information was not possible as each store had to be treated as a singular time series object. Even when we tried to create a standardized value for tracking time series days, we were not able to create a time series model based on all of the data available which meant we had to create an ARIMA model for each site individually. This approach came with additional limitations in that different combinations of parameters optimize the model for each store, meaning to test the accuracy of the model on the holdout set we had to apply the majority combination from the train set which was not the optimal combination of parameters for each store in the test set. The short horizon of data available for each store also made it difficult to implement traidtional time series models as many of the models, such as the ARIMA, are the most accurate at determining seasonality trends when given at least two consecutive years of data to learn from which we did not have available in the dataset.

## Takeaways

My main takeaway from the project was the implementation of a time series model from start to finish. I have never had the opportunity to create and implement a time series model before, especially in a situation where forecasts will need to be made on a daily level and aggregated over a year. In this process I learned not only how to implement a model that was completely new to me, but also how to research and find resources that can be utilized to strengthen a model and increase its complexity past a basic implementation. While I have undergone a process similar to this in many projects, I had never learned a new method completely from scratch without having previous class resources or code to work from which was a great experience in how to learn about new modeling methods on my own. Additionally, I was able to create a workflow that had multiple loops integrated into it which was a necessity based on the structure required to manipulate and institute ARIMA models for all the sites separately. This workflow was really the culmination of everything I learned from how to research new methods to how to integrate these methods' requirements with my existing coding capabilities, such as writing loops and engineering features to be included in the modeling process.
